What does a nonabelian group sound like?
Exploring nonabelian group filters in digital signal processing

RESEARCH QUESTION

If the underlying index set of a digital signal processing algorithm is modified to various nonabelian groups instead of the ordinary abelian, what effects will this have on the audio output?

PROJECT OBJECTIVES

1) Develop mathematical theory to give sonic characterizations to nonabelian groups.
2) Find a short list of nonabelian groups that give interesting results.
3) Implement software program that takes audio as input and allows user to apply filters corresponding to certain groups.

PROJECT SIGNIFICANCE

The proposed research introduces the novel concept of giving sonic characteristics to mathematical groups.  There is also a possibility of applications in digital audio engineering, especially if certain nonabelian groups are shown to produce interesting audio effects.

BACKGROUND/PREVIOUS WORK
In digital signal processing, the convolution function can be described as a sum of weighted translations.  For normal DSP algorithms, this underlying function is defined on the 'index set' of the integers modulo n, with the group operation addition.

My faculty mentor, Dr. DeMeo has previously conducted research involving this topic, and his results were ..... [cite Topics in Nonabelian Harmonic Analyis..]

Similarly, the idea of indexing signals with nonabelian groups has been applied to two dimensional image data with successful results [cite Group Filters and Image Processing]
 
[…need more stuff here…]

METHODOLOGY

We will replace the Z/n index set with various finite nonabelian groups, using the GAP library's SmallGroups and IsAbelian functions to find appropriate groups to test. For each of the groups tested, we implement the convolution function using f(xy^-1) in place of f(x-y) in classic DSP. Here, group multiplication is replacing the traditional addition modulo n as the group operation.  We are essentially "generalizing" the underlying operation.

Matlab will be used for much of the initial testing, as it provides easy methods for constructing WAV files "from scratch" with its wavwrite() function.  Additionally, M. An has made public much of the Matlab code used in her work re-indexing signals with image data, and this code will be a valuable resource as we seek to apply similar concepts to audio.

As the project progresses, we will likely use the JavaSound library and implement the modified DSP algorithm in Java.  JavaSound provides methods of reading and altering wav files frequencies and sound intensity levels, which will prove useful when we apply our modified DSP algorithms to more complex sounds.

[again, need more specifics here]

EXPECTED TIMELINE

October - December 2013: Familiarize with current DSP algorithms and further knowledge of underlying group theory behind DSP implementations.

January - May 2014: Write code to implement DSP algorithms with varying nonabelian groups and group operations.  Analyze results and write up reports.

June - October 2014: Prepare for and attend conferences

ANTICIPATED RESULTS/DISSEMINATION

By the end of the Spring 2014 semester, I expect to have written Matlab programs to test the results of the modified DSP implementations described above.  I also expect to have developed a Java software program which allows easy application of nonabelian group filters through a graphical user interface.  I hope that the results will prove interesting and have practical applications in computational music theory.  The abstract for this project has already been accepted for presentation at the Joint Mathematics Meetings in Baltimore.  In addition, I will submit our work to the International Computer Music Association (ICMC) and International Symposium on Musical Accoustics (ISMA) conferences, as well as the 14th International Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression. Previous, similar works by my faculty mentor Dr. DeMeo have been accepted at both ICMC and ISMA, so we have high hopes.  Furthermore, I will send in the formal paper to several Mathematical and Music scholarly journals. At the very least, I will present my findings thus far at Discovery Day 2014.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

I have never had considerable ability with music, but I have always been fascinated by its intersection with my favorite subject, mathematics.  This project piqued my interest because it allows me the rare opportunity to contribute to both fields.  I believe that I have developed the necessary skills to succeed in this project through my past mathematical research projects and my current internship developing Java applications at a local software company.  A Magellan Grant would allow me the fiscal freedom to dedicate time to engaging in research and possibly traveling to share my findings with international audiences.